Assumptions made for Iteration 1:

Auth_login 
1) The password should be valid.
2) The returned id should correspond to the user.

Auth_register
1) The given information should be in correct order.
2) The password consists of letters and numbers.
3) Names should consist of letters.

Channel_create -
1) Multiple channels can share the same name 
2) The generated id is unique and ordered. :)
3) If channel is successfully created, function will return correct channel id that is also unique

Channel_clear -
1) Assuming all functions work, all users and channels will be cleared 

Channel_list
1) The returned list of dictionaries for channels is the same order as they were created
	
Channel_listall 
1) User 1 (i.e. u_id1) can view all channels of other users as they are a \u2018global owner\u2019. 


Assumptions made for Iteration 2:	

Message: 
1)Message_send
    - Assume that all messages in the message_send_v1() function are greater than length 0
2)Message_remove
    -Once a message is removed, that message ID will no longer exist, however, new messages will not replace that ID. 
    E.g if Message_id3 is removed, the next message will still be message_id4  

Notifications
1) Notifications are only for tags and channel/dm invitations

Auth features:
1) u_id starts from 1 and keep ascending with user numbers increase.
2) session id is formed by uuid.
3) token should contain session id that is generated by uuid.

Admin features:
1) passed permission id should be a number.

Search:
1) Returned list contains most latest message first, messages in channels first.
2) Returned messages contain query string, cannot be null .

User:
1)user features 
    -user must be logged in to change handle, email, first / last name,
2)usersall 
    - user calling this function must have a valid u_id 
3)user profile 
    - user calling must have be an authorised id and is registered
4)userfirstname/lastname 
    - user first and last name cannot be blank 
5)user email 
    - email cannot be blank 
    - The updated email cannot be invalid, thus, has to have proper syntax e.g. '@' and '.'
    - If the updated email is the same as a preexisting email, it will raise an InputError
6)user handle 
    - handle cannot be blank

DM: 
1)dm/leave 
    -if the owner leaves the DM, the DM is removed
    
2)dm/invite
    - The owner of the DM is the only user who can invite another user 




Channel 
1)Channel_join
    - Assume that negative user_id and channel_id are invalid user inputs
    - Assume that current channel members do not try to join channel
    - Assume that the channel can be either public or private
2) Channel_messages
    - Assume that start index < 0 is an invalid input and return InputError
3) Channel_invite
    -channel invites can be given to any user from any type of channel whether it be public or private
    - Only channel owners and not 'all_members' can give out channel invites
4) Channel_leave 
    -If the channel owners leave a channel, the channel still exists. Others users can still join the channel 
    - If channel owners leave, they are removed from both 'all_members' and 'owner_members' dictionary 
5) Channel_addowner
    -If the original owner leaves the channel, new members DO NOT automatically become owners 
6) Channel_removeowner
    -Only an owner can remove other owners from the channel, does not matter who the creator of the channel is
    -There always has to be at least one owner in the channel at a moment in time. I.e. an owner cannot run channel_removeowner. 
 